# 2023 Coaches

12U Gold-head: Troy Bachmann, asst: Chris Larson, mgr: Matt Johnson

12U Purple-head: John Tenwinkel, asst: Kevin Strong, mgr: Emily Dunnigan

12U Yellow - head: TBD, asst: Jacob Lemmon, mgr: TBD

12U Gray-head: Chet Gunhus, asst: Angela Brau, mgr: TBD

10U Gold-head: Brad Worm, asst: Elliot Schoon, mgr: TBD

10U Purple-head: Andy Granowski, asst: Chad Petrie, mgr: Matt Pommier

10U Yellow-head: Justin Ellison, asst: Amy Kuester, mgr: Troy Stein

10U Black - co-coaches: Curtis Hartfiel and Jamie Houselog, mgr: TBD

10U Gray-head: Luke Rogers, asst: TBD, mgr: TBD

8U Gold-head: Adam Botz, asst: Jeff Kuester, mgr: Brandy Dressen

8U Purple - co-coaches: Amy Watson and Jill Krahn, mgr: Megan Medina

8U Yellow-head: Erica Goede, asst: Jeremy Forcier, mgr: TBD

8U Black-head: Ross Peterson, asst: Chris Hammer, mgr: Wade Johnson

# 2023 Coaches Meeting

1. Coaches and managers are not reimbursed registration fees. You will be reimbursed your
families volunteer hour requirement.
2. Coach requirements (these are required each year):
   1. **ACE Certification - Head coach** (travel and community) should complete the certification process which includes the background check. There will be a fee for this certification. Once you receive your certification and background check results, upload it in the compliance section of the MNSoftball.com website; K12 can email certificates to cysafastpitch@gmail.com. Good for one year (August to July). https://mnsoftball.com/pages/cms/ace
   2. **SafeSport Training - All coaches** (travel and community) are required to complete concussion training prior to coaching any practices or games. There is no cost to complete the training. Use the link below. Upload your result on the MNSoftball.com website; K12 can email results to cysafastpitch@gmail.com. Good for one year. https://mnsoftball.com/pages/cms/safesport
   3. **Concussion - All coaches** (travel and community) are required to complete concussion training prior to coaching any practices or games. There is no cost to complete the training. Use the link below. Upload your result on the MNSoftball.com website; K12 can email results to cysafastpitch@gmail.com. https://mnsoftball.com/pages/cms/concussion Good for three years.
   4. **Background Check - All coaches** (travel, community and K12) must complete a background check. HEAD COACHES, this is one of the steps in the ACE certification, no need to double up. Use the link below. Upload your result on the MNSoftball.com website; K12 can email results to cysafastpitch@gmail.com and you will get reimbursed at the end of the season. Good for one year. https://mnsoftball.com/pages/cms/background-checks

** we will not release your practice schedule until this is complete.
Maximum of three coaches/adults will be allowed in the dugout. Only two coaches and one manager will get volunteer fees waived.

3. Teams are posted online. Please be sure to contact your players ASAP if you have not already done so.